README.md, before:

# DynaMorph

This is a repo storing codes and scripts for **DynaMorph: learning morphodynamic states of human cells with live imaging and sc-RNAseq**, manuscript of this work can be accessed [here](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.20.213074v1). Analyzing pipeline of DynaMorph and structure of this repo are introduced below.

![pipeline_fig](graphicalabstract_dynamorph.jpg)

### Table of contents:

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [DynaMorph Pipeline](#dynamorph-pipeline)
  - [Label-free Imaging](#label-free-imaging)
  - [Cell Segmentation and Tracking](#cell-segmentation-and-tracking)
  - [Latent Representations of Morphology](#latent-representations-of-morphology)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Citing DynaMorph](#citing-dynamorph)

## Requirements

DynaMorph is developed and tested under Python 3.7, packages below are required.

- [imageio](https://imageio.github.io/)
- [Keras](https://keras.io/)
- [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)
- [NumPy](https://numpy.org/)
- [OpenCV](https://opencv.org/about/)
- [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/)
- [SciPy](https://www.scipy.org/)
- [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/)
- [segmentation-models](https://github.com/qubvel/segmentation_models)
  - DynaMorph requires segmentation-models v0.2.1
- [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/)
- [tifffile](https://pypi.org/project/tifffile/)

## Getting Started

DynaMorph utilizes a broad set of deep learning and machine learning tools to analyze cell imaging data, [pipeline](https://github.com/czbiohub/dynamorph/tree/master/pipeline) folder contains wrapper methods for easy access to the functionalities of DynaMorph. We also maintained some example scripts `run_preproc.py`, `run_segmentation.py`, `run_patch.py` and `run_VAE.py` to facilitate parallelization of data processing. Check [section](#cell-segmentation-and-tracking) below for functionalities this repo provides.

## DynaMorph Pipeline

DynaMorph starts with raw image files from cell imaging experiments and sequentially applies a set of segmentation and encoding tools. Below we briefly introduced the main processing steps.

### Label-free Imaging
(for pipeline, can use data acquired from any microscopy source -- file format as .tif)
(in dynamorph paper, we use phase and retardance)
(collect polarization-resolved label-free images using method in <reference to virtual staining paper> )

### Cell Segmentation and Tracking

![pipeline_fig](pipeline.jpg)

Scripts under `NNsegmentation` folder contain codes for U-Net based cell segmentation model. `NNsegmentation/run.py` provides an example on the model training procedure. Usage of the segmentation model in the whole pipeline can be found in `pipeline/segmentation.py`.

Instance segmentation in this work is based on clustering, related methods can be found in `SingleCellPatch/extract_patches.py`. Following cell tracking methods can be found in `SingleCellPatch/generate_trajectories.py`.

To generate segmentation and tracking from scratch, follow steps below:

##### <a name="step1"></a> 1. (optional) prepare training images and labels

##### <a name="step2"></a> 2. (optional) train a classifier, see scripts in `NNsegmentation/run.py`

##### <a name="step3"></a> 3. prepare inputs as 4-D numpy arrays of shape (n<sub>time frames</sub>, height, width, n<sub>channels</sub>), see method `pipeline.preprocess.write_raw_to_npy` for an example

##### <a name="step4"></a> 4. apply trained model for semantic segmentation, see method `pipeline.segmentation.segmentation` or `run_segmentation.py` 

##### <a name="step5"></a> 5. use predicted class probabilities for instance segmentation, see method `pipeline.segmentation.instance_segmentation` or `run_segmentation.py` 

##### <a name="step6"></a> 6. connect static cell frames to trajectories, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.build_trajectories` or `run_patch.py` 

### Latent Representations of Morphology
DynaMorph uses VQ-VAE to encode and reconstruct cell image patches, from which latent vectors are used as morphology descriptor. Codes for building and training VAE models are stored in `HiddenStateExtractor/vq_vae.py`.

To extract single cell patches and employ morphology encoding, follow steps below:

##### <a name="step7"></a> 7. extract cell patches based on instance segmentation, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.extract_patches` or `run_patch.py` 

##### <a name="step8"></a> 8. (optional) train a VAE for cell patch reconstruction, see the [main block](https://github.com/czbiohub/dynamorph/blob/8965b5d7b21895d95d548cc3ef6c1a397cee8255/HiddenStateExtractor/vq_vae.py#L1041) of `HiddenStateExtractor/vq_vae.py` for reference.

##### <a name="step9"></a> 9. assemble cell patches generate from step 7 to model-compatible datasets, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.assemble_VAE` or `run_VAE.py`

##### <a name="step10"></a> 10. apply trained VAE models on cell patches, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.process_VAE` or `run_VAE.py` 

## Usage

Example scripts `run_preproc.py`, `run_segmentation.py`, `run_patch.py` and `run_VAE.py` provide command line interface, for detailed usages please check by using the `-h` option. 

To run the dynamorph pipeline, data should first be assembled into 4-D numpy arrays ([step 3](#step3)). Assume raw data (named as `$SITE_NAMES.npy`) are saved under `$RAW_PATH`, and intermediate data will be saved under supplementary folder `$SUPP_PATH`. Related model weights are respectively located at `$UNET_WEIGHT_PATH`, `$VQVAE_WEIGHT_PATH` and `$PCA_WEIGHT_PATH`, below is a simple sequence of commands that could run dynamorph.

Semantic segmentation ([step 4](#step4)) and instance segmentation ([step 5](#step5))):

	python run_segmentation.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m segmentation -f $SITE_NAMES -w $UNET_WEIGHT_PATH
	python run_segmentation.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m instance_segmentation -f $SITE_NAMES

Extract patches from segmentation results ([step 7](#step7)), then connect them into trajectories ([step 6](#step6)):

	python run_patch.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m extract_patches -f $SITE_NAMES
	python run_patch.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m build_trajectories -f $SITE_NAMES

Initiate a trained VQ-VAE model and encode cell image patches into morphology descriptors ([step 9](#step9) and [10](#step10)):

	python run_VAE.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m assemble -f $SITE_NAMES
	python run_VAE.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m process -f $SITE_NAMES -w $VQVAE_WEIGHT_PATH
	python run_VAE.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m pca -f $SITE_NAMES -w $PCA_WEIGHT_PATH

## Citing DynaMorph

To cite DynaMorph, please use the bibtex entry below:

```
@article{wu2020dynamorph,
  title={DynaMorph: learning morphodynamic states of human cells with live imaging and sc-RNAseq},
  author={Wu, Zhenqin and Chhun, Bryant B and Schmunk, Galina and Kim, Chang and Yeh, Li-Hao and Nowakowski, Tomasz J and Zou, James and Mehta, Shalin B},
  journal={bioRxiv},
  year={2020},
  publisher={Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory}
}
```

## Contact Us

If you have any questions regarding this work or codes in this repo, feel free to raise an issue or reach out to us through:
- Zhenqin Wu <zqwu@stanford.edu>
- Bryant Chhun <bryant.chhun@czbiohub.org>

Commit message:

Squashed commit of the following:
commit 0cf4c35b60efcf1b5c6bf173c92523017f1b17f2
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Wed Feb 3 20:38:53 2021 -0800

    update run_dim_reduction.py

commit 36bbab39e9b3cc359b91c6677e9038eec4a03b54
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Wed Feb 3 14:04:50 2021 -0800

    fix README.md

commit 408aa226902b82e5e742ab4d93a1564b465b5854
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Wed Feb 3 13:49:12 2021 -0800

    add docstrings

commit 6269c55b95834603070fc139d71d615e2656fb51
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Wed Feb 3 09:00:21 2021 -0800

    clean up

commit ea4bd641c0cfe8e14bdacbb7bf6c6445edf08ccf
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Mon Feb 1 18:37:56 2021 -0800

    simple data augmentation

commit 90db049fa2b39dcb50e57f72b5c218758ac1c90f
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Mon Jan 11 20:14:49 2021 -0800

    Adopt original VQVAE model; add dimensionality reduction CLI

commit 9ba060ffc3b9bc275a996e763146ec6cbcba8cdf
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Mon Dec 7 15:22:47 2020 -0800

    refactor function locations in modules

commit 912cda230ffb6758f2198d7f9b066350f30c4cc9
Author: smguo <symguo@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Nov 12 19:36:58 2020 -0800

    make pipeline compatible with cardiomyocyte data

commit c6009cc1f37ac5a27e553bfe88164643d95c499e
Merge: d685633 b1af2e5
Author: Zhenqin Wu <zqwu@stanford.edu>
Date:   Sat Oct 17 15:04:34 2020 +0800

    Merge pull request #4 from czbiohub/CLI

    Add CLI example in README

README.md, after:

# DynaMorph

This is a repo storing codes and scripts for **DynaMorph: learning morphodynamic states of human cells with live imaging and sc-RNAseq**, manuscript of this work can be accessed [here](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.20.213074v1). Analyzing pipeline of DynaMorph and structure of this repo are introduced below.

![pipeline_fig](graphicalabstract_dynamorph.jpg)

### Table of contents:

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [DynaMorph Pipeline](#dynamorph-pipeline)
  - [Label-free Imaging](#label-free-imaging)
  - [Cell Segmentation and Tracking](#cell-segmentation-and-tracking)
  - [Latent Representations of Morphology](#latent-representations-of-morphology)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Citing DynaMorph](#citing-dynamorph)

## Requirements

DynaMorph is developed and tested under Python 3.7, packages below are required.

- [imageio](https://imageio.github.io/)
- [Keras](https://keras.io/)
- [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)
- [NumPy](https://numpy.org/)
- [OpenCV](https://opencv.org/about/)
- [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/)
- [SciPy](https://www.scipy.org/)
- [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/)
- [segmentation-models](https://github.com/qubvel/segmentation_models)
  - DynaMorph requires segmentation-models v0.2.1
- [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/)
- [tifffile](https://pypi.org/project/tifffile/)

## Getting Started

DynaMorph utilizes a broad set of deep learning and machine learning tools to analyze cell imaging data, [pipeline](https://github.com/czbiohub/dynamorph/tree/master/pipeline) folder contains wrapper methods for easy access to the functionalities of DynaMorph. We also maintained some example scripts `run_preproc.py`, `run_segmentation.py`, `run_patch.py` and `run_VAE.py` to facilitate parallelization of data processing. Check [section](#cell-segmentation-and-tracking) below for functionalities this repo provides.

## DynaMorph Pipeline

DynaMorph starts with raw image files from cell imaging experiments and sequentially applies a set of segmentation and encoding tools. Below we briefly introduced the main processing steps.

### Label-free Imaging
(for pipeline, can use data acquired from any microscopy source -- file format as .tif)
(in dynamorph paper, we use phase and retardance)
(collect polarization-resolved label-free images using method in <reference to virtual staining paper> )

### Cell Segmentation and Tracking

![pipeline_fig](pipeline.jpg)

Scripts under `NNsegmentation` folder contain codes for U-Net based cell segmentation model. `NNsegmentation/run.py` provides an example on the model training procedure. Usage of the segmentation model in the whole pipeline can be found in `pipeline/segmentation.py`.

Instance segmentation in this work is based on clustering, related methods can be found in `SingleCellPatch/extract_patches.py`. Following cell tracking methods can be found in `SingleCellPatch/generate_trajectories.py`.

To generate segmentation and tracking from scratch, follow steps below:

##### <a name="step1"></a> 1. (optional) prepare training images and labels

##### <a name="step2"></a> 2. (optional) train a classifier, see scripts in `NNsegmentation/run.py`

##### <a name="step3"></a> 3. prepare inputs as 4-D numpy arrays of shape (n<sub>time frames</sub>, height, width, n<sub>channels</sub>), see method `pipeline.preprocess.write_raw_to_npy` for an example

##### <a name="step4"></a> 4. apply trained model for semantic segmentation, see method `pipeline.segmentation.segmentation` or `run_segmentation.py` 

##### <a name="step5"></a> 5. use predicted class probabilities for instance segmentation, see method `pipeline.segmentation.instance_segmentation` or `run_segmentation.py` 

##### <a name="step6"></a> 6. connect static cell frames to trajectories, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.build_trajectories` or `run_patch.py` 

### Latent Representations of Morphology
DynaMorph uses VQ-VAE to encode and reconstruct cell image patches, from which latent vectors are used as morphology descriptor. Codes for building and training VAE models are stored in `HiddenStateExtractor/vq_vae.py`.

To extract single cell patches and employ morphology encoding, follow steps below:

##### <a name="step7"></a> 7. extract cell patches based on instance segmentation, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.extract_patches` or `run_patch.py` 

##### <a name="step8"></a> 8. (optional) train a VAE for cell patch reconstruction, see the [main block](https://github.com/czbiohub/dynamorph/blob/8965b5d7b21895d95d548cc3ef6c1a397cee8255/HiddenStateExtractor/vq_vae.py#L1041) of `HiddenStateExtractor/vq_vae.py` for reference.

##### <a name="step9"></a> 9. assemble cell patches generate from step 7 to model-compatible datasets, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.assemble_VAE` or `run_VAE.py`

##### <a name="step10"></a> 10. apply trained VAE models on cell patches, see method `pipeline.patch_VAE.process_VAE` or `run_VAE.py` 

## Usage

Example scripts `run_preproc.py`, `run_segmentation.py`, `run_patch.py` and `run_VAE.py` provide command line interface, for detailed usages please check by using the `-h` option. 

To run the dynamorph pipeline, data should first be assembled into 4-D numpy arrays ([step 3](#step3)). Assume raw data (named as `$SITE_NAMES.npy`) are saved under `$RAW_PATH`, and intermediate data will be saved under supplementary folder `$SUPP_PATH`. Related model weights are respectively located at `$UNET_WEIGHT_PATH`, `$VQVAE_WEIGHT_PATH` and `$PCA_WEIGHT_PATH`, below is a simple sequence of commands that could run dynamorph.

Semantic segmentation ([step 4](#step4)) and instance segmentation ([step 5](#step5))):

	python run_segmentation.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m segmentation -f $SITE_NAMES -w $UNET_WEIGHT_PATH
	python run_segmentation.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m instance_segmentation -f $SITE_NAMES

Extract patches from segmentation results ([step 7](#step7)), then connect them into trajectories ([step 6](#step6)):

	python run_patch.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m extract_patches -f $SITE_NAMES
	python run_patch.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m build_trajectories -f $SITE_NAMES

Initiate a trained VQ-VAE model and encode cell image patches into morphology descriptors ([step 9](#step9) and [10](#step10)):

	python run_VAE.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m assemble -f $SITE_NAMES
	python run_VAE.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m process -f $SITE_NAMES -w $VQVAE_WEIGHT_PATH
	python run_VAE.py -r $RAW_PATH -s $SUPP_PATH -m pca -f $SITE_NAMES -w $PCA_WEIGHT_PATH

Reduce the dimension of latent vectors for visualization by fitting a PCA or UMAP model to the data. For UMAP:

    python run_dim_reduction.py -i <input dir 1> <input dir 2> ... -w <model dir> -f -m umap -p <prefix> -c <condition 1> <condition 2> ...
"prefix" is the string in the latent vector filename "{prefix}_latent_space"
## Citing DynaMorph

To cite DynaMorph, please use the bibtex entry below:

```
@article{wu2020dynamorph,
  title={DynaMorph: learning morphodynamic states of human cells with live imaging and sc-RNAseq},
  author={Wu, Zhenqin and Chhun, Bryant B and Schmunk, Galina and Kim, Chang and Yeh, Li-Hao and Nowakowski, Tomasz J and Zou, James and Mehta, Shalin B},
  journal={bioRxiv},
  year={2020},
  publisher={Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory}
}
```

## Contact Us

If you have any questions regarding this work or codes in this repo, feel free to raise an issue or reach out to us through:
- Zhenqin Wu <zqwu@stanford.edu>
- Bryant Chhun <bryant.chhun@czbiohub.org>
